
??Object Agreement in English
=============================

This note examines whether an argument can be made for an AGR_o
functional projection motivated by the need for certain verbs in
English to optionally check agreement with the object under a
SPEC-head relation.

There seems to be an optionality to argument-verb agreement in certain
environments shown in (1) and (2).

(1) a.  There is $\alpha$[ a chair ] in the garden.
    b.  There are $\alpha$[ four chairs ] in the garden.
    c.  There's $\alpha$[ four chairs ] in the garden.
    d. *There is $\alpha$[ four chairs ] in the garden.

(2) a.  There seem t to be lots of reasons to avoid him.
    b. ?There seems t to be lots of reasons to avoid him.
    c.  There seems t to be no reason to avoid him.

Both 1(a) and 1(b) can be analyzed as the $\alpha$ having raised at LF
to adjoin to 'there' where agreement is checked with the verb at
[SPEC,AGRsP]. But under this analysis 1(c) cannot be acceptable unless
we allow AGRsP to be an ambiguous projection. But there is little to
warrant such a capability outside this environment, which motivates
the move of such an option to another functional projection which we
call AGRoP. Under such an analysis, AGRoP would be ambiguous between
having a strong vs. weak feature. With a strong feature $\alpha$ would
move from complement of the verb to [SPEC,AGRoP] for reasons of
enlightened self interest and agree with the verb adjoined to AGRo and
then would move to adjoin to 'there' to pick up case. The verb adjoins
to TP to give us the overt word order. In the case where AGRoP is weak
the agreement feature is relaxed and $\alpha$ remains in the
complement position raising at LF and the derivation converges. This
does not explain the ungrammaticality of 1(d) nor the contrast between
1(c) and 1(d).[1]

Perhaps a stronger claim is that object agreement in English occurs in
predicates that fall into Burzio's generalization.

(3) a.  $\alpha$[ The girls ] worry John t.
    b.  $\alpha$[ John ] worries the girls t.

(4) a.  $\alpha$[ The girl ] is likely t to win.
    b.  $\alpha$[ The girls ] are likely t to win.

(5) a.  $\alpha$[ The door ] opens t.
    b.  $\alpha$[ The doors ] open t.

(6) a.  $\alpha$[ The book ] was read by John t.
    b.  $\alpha$[ The books ] were read by John t.

The motivation for object agreement in the above examples is weak: we
can postulate that $\alpha$ moves to [SPEC,AGR_o] where it checks
agreement with the verb adjoined to AGR_o, and then moves up to
[SPEC,AGR_s] to satisfy the strong NP feature which tense carries, but
there is no motivation to move to AGR_o, the agreement can just as
well be checked at [SPEC,AGR_s]. Nonetheless, the analysis is
available.

We can also apply this analysis to cases as in (7) below, where the NP
raises out of the adjectival phrase to [SPEC,AGR_o] at LF to check
agreement if we assume the above mechanism, and then raises further to
[SPEC,AGRsP].

(7) a.  [ The girl ] is [ t intelligent ].
    b.  [ The girls ] are [ t intelligent ].


Footnotes:
-------------------------
[1] Is (2) similar?

