---
layout: post
title: "Talk at UW ECE on Feb 16, 2016"
---

I am going to give a talk at University of Washington, ECE department on Feb 16, 2016.

### Segmentation and stream decoding for simultaneous speech translation 

### Abstract:

> Simultaneous speech translation attempts to produce high quality
> translations while at the same time minimizing the latency between
> production of words in the source language and translation into the
> target language.

> A key prediction problem in simultaneous translation is when to
> start translating the input stream. I will talk about two new
> algorithms that together provide a solution to this problem. The
> first algorithm learns to find effective places to break the input
> stream. In order to balance the often conflicting demands of low
> latency and high translation quality, the algorithm exploits the
> notion of Pareto optimality. The second algorithm is a stream decoder
> that incrementally processes the input stream from left to right
> and produces output translations for segments of the input. These
> segments are found by consulting classifiers trained on data created
> by the first algorithm.

> We compare our approach with previous work and present translation
> quality scores (BLEU scores) and the latency of generating translations
> (number of segments translated per second) on audio lecture data
> from the TED talks collection.

* Where: [map](https://maps.google.com/maps?hl=en&q=EEB%20105)
* [More info at UW](https://www.ee.washington.edu/cgi-bin/research/colloquium/display.pl?id=260)
