SFU                       Computing Science                       07-3
________________________________________________________________________
CMPT 379-3 SECT   Principles of Compiler Design
 Instructor: A. Sarkar                       WHERE
 LECTURE TIME TBA ... EXAM TIME TBA
________________________________________________________________________

OBJECTIVE/DESCRIPTION:

This is a course for those who are interested in the design and practice of
programming languages.  If you want to learn how to design and implement
your own programming language, then take this course.  Every computing
device built today needs a compiler.  It enables us to use a high-level
programming language like C or Java by translating programs into low-level
machine code.  Understanding how compilers work is essential if you want to
be a good programmer.  The study of compilers also includes interesting
ideas in translation and optimization with sparse resources.  As part of
the course, the carefully designed assignments will allow students to
implement a working compiler using standard compiler tools.  Students
lacking the MACM 201 pre-requisite should contact the instructor.  The
course web page contains more information:  visit
http://www.cs.sfu.ca/CourseCentral/379/anoop/

TOPICS:

   o Overview of a compiler
   o Lexical Analysis:  regular expressions and finite-state machines
   o Simple Parsing:  context-free grammars, top-down and bottom-up parsing
   o LL(1) parsing:  efficient top-down parsing
   o Shift-reduce parsers:  introduction to bottom-up parsing
   o SLR/LR parsing:  fast and efficient bottom-up parsing
   o Type checking:  checking semantics of programs
   o Semantics and code generation:  from a high-level language to assembly
     language
   o Optimization:  an introduction to various types of code optimization

GRADING:

The grade distribution will be handed out at the start of classes.

TEXTBOOKS:

   o Compilers:  Principles, Techniques and Tools (2nd Edition), A. V. Aho,
     M. S. Lam, R. Sethi, and J. D. Ullman, Addison-Wesley, 2006:  ISBN-13:
     978-0321486813 (the purple dragon book)

REFERENCES:

   o

PREREQUISITES/COREQUISITES:

MACM 201 ( or CMPT 205), CMPT 150 and CMPT 201 ( or 225)

Distributed:  June 4, 2007

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Academic Honesty plays a key role in our efforts to maintain a high
standard of academic excellence and integrity.  Students are advised that
ALL acts of intellectual dishonesty are subject to disciplinary action by
the School; serious infractions are dealt with in accordance with the Code
of Academic Honesty (T10.02)
(http://www.sfu.ca/policies/teaching/t10-02.htm).  Students are encouraged
to read the School's Statement on Intellectual Honesty
(http://www.cs.sfu.ca/undergrad/Policies/honesty.html).
